Hi guys, and welcome back.
In this video, we'll finally be learning about functions.
We've been using functions such as print, len, or zip,
but we haven't really learned how they work
behind the scenes or even how we can define our own.
So that's what we're gonna be looking at in this video.
Let's create our first function.
Functions always start with the def keyword.
Just like if and for,
def is a Python keyword,
and after it you put a space,
and what this tells Python
is that you are about to define a function.
So the next thing is the function name.
For example, the print function is called print.
Len function is called len.
So here you can name your function whatever you want,
for example, greet.
Afterwards, you have to put a pair of brackets.
So that's an opening bracket and a closing bracket.
Inside the brackets, you can put some stuff,
but we're gonna learn how to do that
in a future video.
After the brackets, the usual colon.
And now of course, we have an indented block
which will be the body of the function.
Let me write some code in here and show you
how functions operate.
So I've written our usual code here
that asks the user for their name,
and then prints hello name.
This is the body of the function,
and the function is called greet.
If we run this code such as by pressing the run button,
Python would start running at line one
and it would encounter this def keyword.
When Python encounters a def keyword,
it knows you want to define a new function,
so it takes note of the name.
In addition, if there was anything inside the brackets,
it would also look at that,
but there's nothing there for now.
So Python knows the name of the new function
that we've defined,
and then Python instantly skips over the entire body.
It does not run the body.
So these lines here, if we run this programme, never execute.
Nothing happens.
Nothing is printed out because they are inside the function,
and what we've done in this piece of code
is we have defined the function.
We've created it, but now we need to run it,
so we will say greet just like that,
and that runs your function.
So if we press play,
you'll now see enter your name,
and we can enter anything we want,
and then the print statement as well.
You can put as much or as little code
as you want inside a function,
but you should prefer shorter functions over longer ones.
That's because the longer your functions get,
the more jumping around you're gonna see in your programmes,
and it's gonna be a bit more difficult to read.
And remember, you can always create more functions.
Just make sure to un-indent and put another def statement
if you want to create another function.
Functions can call other functions.
Calling is the same as executing,
so you can always define a function and call it from here,
and then you can define another one
and call it somewhere else and so on.
Something important is that you can only call a function
after it's been defined, but not before.
So if I move the greet to line one say,
now we will get an error because it doesn't know
what greet is until after it's run the def statement.
Finally, if you try to do something like print name
which is the variable that we defined inside the function,
you will get an error.
So let's try that out.
You get an error that says that the name name,
which is our variable, is not defined.
Although it was defined inside the function,
and we actually ran the function,
variables created inside a function die
when they reach the end of the function.
So you can create variables in here
that will only be used within the function itself.
All right, that's everything for now.
Thank you for joining me in this video.
I hope you've learned something,
and I'll see you in the next one.
We're going to be using functions
a lot throughout this course.